---
inFeed: true
hasPage: true
inNav: false
inLanguage: null
keywords: []
description: ''
datePublished: '2016-08-17T14:35:07.593Z'
dateModified: '2016-08-17T14:35:01.136Z'
title: ''
author: []
via: {}
authors: []
publisher: {}
starred: false
sourcePath: >-
  _posts/2016-08-17-how-one-wins-the-lottery-of-life-the-origin-of-american-ci.md
url: how-one-wins-the-lottery-of-life-the-origin-of-american-ci/index.html
_type: Article

---
****

**How One Wins the
Lottery of Life -- the origin of American citizenship**

It will prove helpful in furthering the discussion to clarify now the different means by which citizenship can be acquired. There are two common principles embodied in the laws that define citizenship around the world. Citizenship due simply to the fact of birth within the territory of a state is known as jus soli. The other common principle, where the status of one parent determines citizenship, is known as jus sanguinis. The existence of jus soli in the United States---even though it is qualified---is an example of American exceptionalism, as a majority of countries do not recognize it (Canada is another notable exception to this general rule). The third principle is naturalization. In fact, as I observed earlier, only a qualified jus soli and naturalization are constitutionally recognized sources of citizenship, and they were so even prior to the ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment. Jus sanguinis, on the other hand, was established by statute in 1790, and has never been incorporated into the Constitution (Wong 1898, 672-3). Citizenship as a result of the status of parents, then, is not constitutional, but statutory. In other words, jus sanguinis in the United States is derived from Congress's naturalization power.

The question of the meaning of "jurisdiction" in the first sentence of the Fourteenth Amendment has directly been addressed in only one Supreme Court decision---[Elk v. Wilkins][0]. The question in Elk was whether the plaintiff, John Elk, an Indian born in the United States in tribal relation, that is, born into a tribe "which still exists and is recognized as a tribe by the government of the United States," having both severed said tribal relation and "fully and completely surrendered himself to the jurisdiction of the United States," and continuing to be so subject, was a citizen of the United States under the Fourteenth Amendment and, thus, entitle to vote under the Fifteenth Amendment (Elk, 99). The plaintiff did "not allege that the United States accepted his surrender, or that he \[had\] ever been naturalized, or taxed, or in any way recognized or treated as a citizen, by the State or by the United States. Nor is it contended by his counsel that there is any statute or treaty that makes him a citizen" (ibid).

Justice Gray succinctly summarized the general question that the decision would resolve when he wrote,

> The question then is, whether an Indian, born a member of one of the Indian tribes within the United States, is, merely by reason of his birth within the United States, and of his afterwards voluntarily separating himself from his tribe and taking up residency among white citizens, a citizens of the United States, within the meaning of the first section of the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution (ibid).

The answer was no. As has been repeatedly mentioned, the Constitution provides for two distinct sources of citizenship: birth and naturalization, both of which are qualified. As observed by Justice Gray,

> The persons declared to be citizens are 'all persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof.' The evident meaning of these last words is, not merely subject in some respect or degree to the jurisdiction of the United States, but completely subject to their political jurisdiction, and owing them direct and immediate allegiance. And the words relate to the time of birth in the one case, as they do to the time of naturalization in the other. Persons not thus subject to the jurisdiction of the United States at the time of birth cannot become so afterwards, except by being naturalized, either individually, as by proceedings under the naturalization acts, or collectively, as by the force of a treaty by which foreign territory is acquired (ibid, 101-02).

Seen here is a part of the origin of the political conception of jurisdiction. But what is most important to note in this regard is the importance placed upon time. Citizenship by birth is immediate, that is, a child who is born in accordance with the laws simply is a citizen. Since there is no time at which the child is not a citizen, the child does not become one; rather, to become a citizen is to be naturalized, a process distinct from that of birth. "To be a citizen of the United States is a political privilege which no one, not born to, can assume without its consent in some form" (ibid, 109; emphasis added). The question, then, becomes why does any child owe "direct and immediate allegiance" to a particular political community? As will be shown, that which gives rise to allegiance also gives rise to citizenship.

Some advocates of political jurisdiction have suggested that the allegiance of the child follows that of its parents, however, the Constitution nowhere refers to the parents of the persons born. The language of the Fourteenth Amendment speaks only of the individuals, the persons, who are born or naturalized. To interpret "and subject to the jurisdiction thereof" as incorporating the allegiance descendant from the parents of the child is to convert the idea of jus soli, qualified as it is in the Constitution, into that of jus sanguinis, a source of citizenship, as was said earlier, that is derivative of the naturalization power of Congress. In other words, in looking to the allegiance of the parents one completely erases the very idea of birthright citizenship explicitly contained within the Constitution as a distinct source other than naturalization. In seeking to answer the question of why at the instant of birth a child owes allegiance to a particular political community it is necessary to look to the child in question and seek to assess his or her relation to said political community; that is, the child must be abstracted from his or her family relations and the family's relations to the political community in question.

That, in fact, is what Justice Gray did in delivering the majority opinion of the Supreme Court in the Elk case (and, as will be seen, this was also done in the majority opinion he delivered for the Court in the case of [Wong Kim Ark][1]).

Indians born within the territorial limits of the United States, members of, and owing immediate allegiance to, one of the Indian tribes (an alien, though dependent, power), although in a geographical sense born in the United States, are no more 'born in the United States and subject to the jurisdiction thereof,' within the meaning of the first section of the Fourteenth Amendment, than the children of subjects of any foreign government born within the domain of that government, or the children born within the United States, of ambassadors or other public ministers of foreign nations (ibid, 102).The two examples cited in support of the conclusion that Indians born in tribal relations are not "subject to the jurisdiction thereof" are key to understanding the individual-community relation under examination. While each example differs in regard to the geographic criteria -- in the former the child is born outside the territorial jurisdiction of the United States, in the latter within it -- both examples share the same political criteria of jurisdiction -- in both the United States recognizes and defers to the sovereign claims of another government (or political community) to the allegiance of the individuals in question. The examples further demonstrate that there are two sources of such deference: de facto in the former and de jure in the latter.In the case of de facto deferment, the United States simply recognizes the enforceable claims of the other sovereign government (or political community). While in theory the United States could declare all children born in France to be American citizens, recognizing them as such in its laws of naturalization (i.e., it could lay a de jure claim upon the allegiance of the children in question), in practice it could not force either the French government (which can enforce its own claim) or the children in question to recognize this claim -- that is, short of conquering France and subjecting the population (cf. Wong, 671-72). In the case of de jure deferment, on the other hand, the United States actually cedes its sovereign claims, which it could enforce, to the other government, which could not enforce its claim by any means short of war; that is, the United States could lay claim to the allegiance of the children of ambassadors and diplomats born in the United States, denying the claim of the other government, and thereby require said government to enforce its own claim. But in the interests of peace, as well as to receive reciprocal treatment, the United States prudently does not do so.The Indian tribes are recognized by the United States government as "alien nations, distinct political communities, with whom the United States might and habitually did deal, as they saw fit, either through treaties made by the President and Senate, or through acts of Congress in the ordinary forms of legislation" (Elk, 99). The floor statements of Senator Trumbull made during the debates on the Civil Rights Act of 1866 best explain the degree to which the tribes were both de facto and de jure independent of the United States.Of course we cannot declare the wild Indians who do not recognize the Government of the United States at all, who are not subject to our laws, with whom we make treaties, who have their own regulations, whom we do not pretend to interfere with or punish for the commission of crimes one upon the other, to be subject\[s\] of the United States, in the sense of being citizens, they must be excepted. ... The Indians have separate governments of their own. They do not recognize nor are they made subject to the laws of the United States. They make and administer their own laws (partially cited by Justice Harlan in dissent to Elk, 113-14).An interesting and telling exemption, noted by Justice Gray in Elk, is made in the Pension Act of 1873: it "exempts Indian claimant of pensions for service in the army or navy from the obligation to take the oath to support the Constitution of the United States" (Elk, 106). Moreover, embodied within "the treaty of 1867 with the Kansas Indians \[was\] the principle that no one can become a citizen of a nation without its consent" (ibid, 103). Likewise, "the free consent of the tribe" was also required for individuals to join it (ibid, 104).

Such exemptions and treaty provisions recognize the sovereignty of the tribes and the resultant primacy of their claims to allegiance; it recognizes them as holding a "separate and equal station" in relation to the United States, as "separate and equal" peoples to the American people -- note, this recognition is in accord with the Declaration's teaching about peoples. The various treaties existent between the tribes and the United States, however, qualify and limit tribal sovereignty, rendering it in many respects dependent upon that of the United States; but, as mentioned by Senator Trumbull, "the very fact that we have treaty relations with them shows that they are not subject to our jurisdiction. We cannot make treaties with ourselves; it would be absurd." Most importantly, at least in regard to the ruling delivered in Elk, the sovereign ability to claim the allegiance of those born into the tribes is not limited either by law or in fact. While the United States could try to lay claim to the allegiance of the children born to the Indian tribes, it would have to do so by force, and there is no certainty that it would succeed without destroying what it sought to claim.

The nature of sovereignty and its relation to citizenship is more thoroughly discussed in Justice Gray's majority opinion delivered for the Supreme Court in Wong than it is Elk. The question in Wong was whether,

> A child born in the United States, of parents of Chinese descent, who, at the time of his birth, are subjects of the Emperor of China, but have a permanent domicile and residence in the United States, and are there carrying on business, and are not employed in any diplomatic or official capacity under the Emperor of China, becomes at the time of his birth a citizen of the United States, by virtue of the first clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution (Wong, 649).

The answer given was yes. In this regard it is important to note, while the Chinese Exclusion Acts denied citizenship to Chinese immigrants, and a treaty with China provided that no subject of China in the United States could be naturalized, these legal instruments spoke only of those of Chinese descent who had not been born within the sovereign jurisdiction of the United States; they simply limited the sovereign power of the United States to naturalize those who had not been born American citizens.

While the United States agreed to limit its sovereign ability to make citizens of the subjects of the Chinese Emperor, it was not required to do so. The subjects of the Chinese Emperor residing in the United States were subject to its sovereign jurisdiction. They had no immunities, unlike ambassadors; crimes committed within their group were subject to punishment by the American, not the Chinese, legal system, unlike Indians (cf. Beck 2004, 39). Nor did they constitute a force supplanting American sovereignty, unlike an invading army. In respect to both geographic and sovereign jurisdiction the subjects of the Emperor were eligible for naturalization; it is simply the fact that the United States has consented not to naturalize them that kept them from becoming naturalized citizens.

Regarding the limitation of sovereign jurisdiction, the majority opinion in Wong, citing Chief Justice Marshall, stated,

> The jurisdiction of the nation within its own territory is necessarily exclusive and absolute. It is susceptible of no limitation not imposed by itself. Any restriction upon it, deriving validity from an external source, would imply a diminution of its sovereignty to the extent of the restriction, and an investment of that sovereignty to the same extent in that power which could impose such restriction. All exceptions, therefore, to the full and complete power of a nation within its own territories must be traced up to the consent of the nation itself. They can flow from no other legitimate source. This consent may be either express or implied. In the latter case, it is less determinate, exposed more to the uncertainties of construction; but, if understood, not less obligatory (The Exchange 1812, 7 Cranch 116, 136; cited in Wong, 683-84).

In the statement cited above we can see the relation of the sovereignty of the Indian tribes to that of the United States. Furthermore, we see that sovereignty by its nature is permanent and eternal, that it must reside somewhere, and that sovereignty can only be limited by sovereignty, either its own or that of another. Its powers may only be ceded to, or seized by, another sovereign power -- the former is likely voluntary, consensual, and express, the latter likely involuntary, nonconsensual, and implied. The three exceptions to birthright citizenship cited in Wong -- "children of members of the Indian tribes, ... children born of alien enemies in hostile occupation and children of diplomatic representatives of a foreign state" -- demonstrate the point (Wong, 682). The first example, already treated in the previous discussion of Elk, likely represents a combination of both ceding and seizing. The two other examples, respectively, represent a de facto seizing and a de jure ceding of sovereign jurisdiction. In all three instances, there are real and observable implications to this limitation of sovereign jurisdiction -- most importantly, the potential for war if the United States were to contest the claim.

The sovereign claim of the community to the allegiance of those born within it is both immediate and general as is its sovereign jurisdiction; unless there is a general exception, set down in law, the community into which a person is born claims it. Furthermore, exceptions necessarily recognize and defer to the claims of another community, whether the claim is based on fact or convention. As Aristotle astutely observes, there are no citizens by nature; rather, all citizens are so by convention, that is, they are made so by the laws (cf. Wong, 668).

That said, good conventions cultivate or perfect what is already present by nature---birthright citizenship as guaranteed in the Constitution is an instance of such a good convention. The community's claim on the allegiance of the newborn is by default because every community, like every individual, naturally seeks to preserve itself (cf. Locke, Second Treatise). At its most vital, the need for community preservation is met by procreation; at its most critical, it is met by preventing the community's dismemberment in war---the success of both of these means of preserving the life and unity of the community requires human bodies. Given that only the former produces persons, it is the most important; however, both means require that the community seek to retain those persons that it has either produced or acquired. The constitutional birthright citizenship of the United States seeks to maximize the retention of those persons it produces, while simultaneously minimizing the threat of war by deferring to the claims of other sovereign communities where it is either necessary or prudent to do so. Finally, the constitutional definition of a citizen also allows for the peaceful acquisition of citizens through the process of naturalization.

Note the political community is increased and preserved naturally through birth, whereas growth and preservation by means of naturalization is strictly by convention. As such, the conventional process of naturalization apes the natural process of birth. This conventional process is necessary to perfect nature, which places the individual by "chance, not choice," into a particular political community -- one that may not allow for the particular nature of the individual in question to develop fully and, consequently, one that said individual may not consent, even tacitly, to remain a part of (Thomas Jefferson' Summary View of the Rights of British America; cf. Locke Second Treatise).

The natural right to emigrate, to choose the political community in which one will live, however, is not unlimited. In the first instance, as mentioned previously, one cannot enter any political community one wishes; rather, it must consent. In the second instance, and perhaps more importantly, while "from the Declaration of Independence to this day, the United States have rejected the doctrine of indissoluble allegiance and maintained the general right of expatriation, \[it is\] to be exercised in subordination to the public interests and subject to regulation" (Wong, 711). That is, the interests of the political community from which one is emigrating limit the general right of expatriation. If it requires your body, it can retain you---by force if necessary. In the primacy of this community claiming is seen the sovereign foundation of citizenship; moreover, the reason why the Constitution uses the "subject" in defining who the United States claims as citizens is underscored.

While, strictly speaking, one would be correct in noting the Founders' rejection of the feudal notion of perpetual allegiance resulting from birth, a view of this rejection that reaches to the idea of birthright citizenship itself, goes too far. The Founders did not reject birthright citizenship per se; rather, they simply rejected the idea that it was unalienable and, thus, that the implied allegiance was perpetual. In fact, since the interests of the political community limit the exercise of the general right of expatriation, alienation, like its reverse process of naturalization, requires reciprocal consent---without that consent an individual remains subject to the claims of his or her political community.

[0]: https://www.law.cornell.edu/supremecourt/text/112/94
[1]: https://www.law.cornell.edu/supremecourt/text/169/649